src,process: initial permission model implementation (#44004)
nodejs/node: doc/api/permissions.md

  This can be used to control what modules can be accessed by third-party
  dependencies, for example.

* [Process-based permissions](#process-based-permissions) control the Node.js

>   process's access to resources (for now, only file system).

Author: I wouldn't mention it here, since they are just a boolean (either you allow it or not). I plan to add a few settings such as "which process would you allow".

>   process's access to resources (for now, only file system).

Reviewer: I just suggest to remove the "only file system", which to me implies that nothing else is supported.

>   process's access to resources such as the file system or the network.

Reviewer 2: I don't see policies related to `network` in the code. Is it futuristic?

Author: Yes, subsequent PRs.

Reviewer 3: It might be worth actually documenting the things that are expected to be added later

Author: I'm afraid of documenting those and never implementing them for unexpected reasons. Perhaps I can just remove the `network` mention?

Reviewer 4: Yup rather just remove the network mention.

  The resource can be entirely allowed or denied, or actions related to it can

>   be controlled. For example, file system reads can be allowed while denying

Reviewer 3: Nit: Our docs tend to be a bit inconsistent on this... is it `file system` or `filesystem`?

Author: Well, @Trott might have the answer, but according to our docs, `file system` is more used.

```console
node on  feat/permission-system [$!?] via ⬢ v16.19.0
➜ grep -roh "filesystem" doc/ | wc -l
      25

node on  feat/permission-system [$!?] via ⬢ v16.19.0
➜ grep -roh "file system" doc/ | wc -l
      74
```

Reviewer 5: We use the Microsoft Style Guide. It doesn't specify which one to use in its A-Z word list, but it does use "file system" internally, so I'd say let's go with that.

Example from https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/d/directory:

> Use _directory_ only in content for developers when you need to refer to the structure of the file system or to match the API.

Author: Updated. Thanks!

```

#### File System Permissions

To allow access to the filesystem, use the [`--allow-fs-read`][] and
[`--allow-fs-write`][] flags:

```console
$ node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=* --allow-fs-write=* index.js
Hello world!
(node:19836) ExperimentalWarning: Permission is an experimental feature
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
```

The valid arguments for both flags are:

* `*` - To allow the all operations to given scope (read/write).
* Paths delimited by comma (,) to manage reading/writing operations.

Example:

* `--allow-fs-read=*` - It will allow all `FileSystemRead` operations.
* `--allow-fs-write=*` - It will allow all `FileSystemWrite` operations.
* `--allow-fs-write=/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemWrite` access to the `/tmp/`
  folder.
* `--allow-fs-read=/tmp/,/home/.gitignore` - It allows `FileSystemRead` access
  to the `/tmp/` folder **and** the `/home/.gitignore` path.

Wildcards are supported too:

* `--allow-fs-read:/home/test*` will allow read access to everything
  that matches the wildcard. e.g: `/home/test/file1` or `/home/test2`

There are constraints you need to know before using this system:

> * Native modules are not restricted by the Permission Model.

Reviewer 3: Why?

Reviewer 4: To quickly clarify one thing in my head, what are referring to when we say "native modules"?

Reviewer 3: Native add-ons (*.node) files and anything loadable using process.dlopen

Reviewer 4: Gotcha, thanks!

Author: Discussing it on https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/44004#discussion_r1056957811

The available permissions are documented by the [`--experimental-permission`][]
flag.

When starting Node.js with `--experimental-permission`,
the ability to access the filesystem, spawn processes, and
use `node:worker_threads` will be restricted.

```console
$ node --experimental-permission index.js
node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:171
  const result = internalModuleStat(filename);
                 ^

Error: Access to this API has been restricted
    at stat (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:171:18)
    at Module._findPath (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:627:16)
    at resolveMainPath (node:internal/modules/run_main:19:25)
    at Function.executeUserEntryPoint [as runMain] (node:internal/modules/run_main:76:24)
    at node:internal/main/run_main_module:23:47 {
  code: 'ERR_ACCESS_DENIED',
  permission: 'FileSystemRead'
}
```

Allowing access to spawning a process and creating worker threads can be done
using the [`--allow-child-process`][] and [`--allow-worker`][] respectively.

#### Runtime API

When enabling the Permission Model through the [`--experimental-permission`][]
flag a new property `permission` is added to the `process` object.
This property contains two functions:

> * `permission.deny(scope [,parameters])`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
##### `permission.deny(scope [,parameters])`
```

API call to deny permissions at runtime ([`permission.deny()`][])

```js
process.permission.deny('fs'); // Deny permissions to ALL fs operations

// Deny permissions to ALL FileSystemWrite operations
process.permission.deny('fs.write');
// deny FileSystemWrite permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.write', ['/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder']);
// Deny permissions to ALL FileSystemRead operations
process.permission.deny('fs.read');
// deny FileSystemRead permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.read', ['/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder']);
```

> API call to check permissions at runtime ([`permission.has()`][])

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
##### `permission.has()`

API call to check permissions at runtime ([`permission.has()`][])
```

```js
process.permission.has('fs.write'); // true
process.permission.has('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // true

process.permission.deny('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');

process.permission.has('fs.write'); // true
process.permission.has('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // false
```

> 

Author: yes, it's global permission for reading files.

[`--allow-fs-write`][] flags:

```console
$ node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=* --allow-fs-write=* index.js
Hello world!
(node:19836) ExperimentalWarning: Permission is an experimental feature
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
```

The valid arguments for both flags are:

* `*` - To allow the all operations to given scope (read/write).
* Paths delimited by comma (,) to manage reading/writing operations.

Example:

* `--allow-fs-read=*` - It will allow all `FileSystemRead` operations.
* `--allow-fs-write=*` - It will allow all `FileSystemWrite` operations.
* `--allow-fs-write=/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemWrite` access to the `/tmp/`
  folder.
* `--allow-fs-read=/tmp/,/home/.gitignore` - It allows `FileSystemRead` access
  to the `/tmp/` folder **and** the `/home/.gitignore` path.

Wildcards are supported too:

* `--allow-fs-read:/home/test*` will allow read access to everything
  that matches the wildcard. e.g: `/home/test/file1` or `/home/test2`

There are constraints you need to know before using this system:

* Native modules are not restricted by the Permission Model.

> * Relative paths are not supported through the CLI (`--allow-fs`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Relative paths are not supported through the CLI (`--allow-fs-*`).
```

  The runtime API supports relative paths.
* The model does not inherit to a child node process.
* The model does not inherit to a worker thread.
* Permission changes are not retroactively applied to existing resources.

>   Consider the following snippet:

Reviewer 6: This doesn't belong to the bulleted list, does it?
```suggestion

Consider the following snippet:
```

Author: It should. It's a complement of the third bullet: `Permission changes are not retroactively applied to existing resources.`

Author: Fixed in 7dc06682d5

process.permission.deny('fs.write');
// deny FileSystemWrite permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.write', ['/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder']);
// Deny permissions to ALL FileSystemRead operations
process.permission.deny('fs.read');
// deny FileSystemRead permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.read', ['/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder']);
```

API call to check permissions at runtime ([`permission.has()`][])

```js
process.permission.has('fs.write'); // true
process.permission.has('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // true

process.permission.deny('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');

process.permission.has('fs.write'); // true
process.permission.has('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // false
```

#### File System Permissions

To allow access to the filesystem, use the flag `--allow-fs`:

```console
$ node --experimental-permission --allow-fs=read index.js
Hello world!
(node:19836) ExperimentalWarning: Permission is an experimental feature
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
```

The valid arguments for the `--allow-fs` flag option are:

> * `write` - To manage `FileSystemWrite` (writing) operations.

Reviewer 7: It should be documented which operations require write access to which part of the file system. For example, IIRC, on many operating systems, creating a new file in a directory requires write permissions on the directory itself, whereas opening the same file for writing requires write permissions on the file but not on the directory. As far as I can tell, this implementation follows its own set of rules.

Author: Sorry, I don't understand. 

> creating a new file in a directory requires write permissions on the directory itself, whereas opening the same file for writing requires write permissions on the file but not on the directory

This is correct. The permission model works this way. Do you mean documenting cases like: if you deny read access to everything you won't be able to require a module?

* `read` - To manage `FileSystemRead` (reading) operations.
* `fs` - To allow all the `FileSystem` operations.

Example:

* `--allow-fs=read:/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemRead` access to the `/tmp/`
  folder.
* `--allow-fs=read:/tmp/:/home/.gitignore` - It allows `FileSystemRead` access
  to the `/tmp/` folder **and** the `/home/.gitignore` path.

You can also mix both arguments:

* `--allow-fs=write,read:/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemRead` access to the
  `/tmp/` folder **and** allow **all** the `FileSystemWrite` operations.
* **Note**: It accepts wildcard parameters as well.
  For instance: `--allow-fs=write:/home/test*` will allow everything that
  matches the wildcard. e.g: `/home/test/file1` or `/home/test2`

There are constraints you need to know before using this system:

* Native modules are not restricted by the Permission Model.
* Relative paths are not supported through the CLI (`--allow-fs`).
  The runtime API supports relative paths.
* Permission changes are not retroactively applied to existing resources.
  Consider the following snippet:

> 

Reviewer 2: can we also document here the inheritance behaviour of the permission model?
 - the model does / does not inherit to a child node process
 - the model does / nodes not inherit to a worker thread

Author: Sure! Good point

Additionally, import maps only work on `import` so it may be desirable to add a
`"import"` condition to all dependency mappings.

## Process-based permissions

### Permission Model

<!-- type=misc -->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

<!-- name=permission-model -->

The Node.js Permission Model is a mechanism for restricting access to specific
resources during execution.
The API exists behind a flag [`--experimental-permission`][] which when enabled,
will restrict access to all available permissions.

The available permissions are documented by the [`--experimental-permission`][]

> flag.

Author: If you go to cli.md#--experimental-permission will have the list of available permissions.

process.permission.has('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // true

process.permission.deny('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');

process.permission.has('fs.write'); // true
process.permission.has('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // false
```

#### File System Permissions

To allow access to the filesystem, use the [`--allow-fs-read`][] and
[`--allow-fs-write`][] flags:

```console
$ node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=* --allow-fs-write=* index.js
Hello world!
(node:19836) ExperimentalWarning: Permission is an experimental feature
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
```

The valid arguments for both flags are:

* `*` - To allow the all operations to given scope (read/write).
* Paths delimited by comma (,) to manage reading/writing operations.

Example:

* `--allow-fs-read=*` - It will allow all `FileSystemRead` operations.
* `--allow-fs-write=*` - It will allow all `FileSystemWrite` operations.
* `--allow-fs-write=/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemWrite` access to the `/tmp/`
  folder.
* `--allow-fs-read=/tmp/,/home/.gitignore` - It allows `FileSystemRead` access

>   to the `/tmp/` folder **and** the `/home/.gitignore` path.

Reviewer 7: What's the proper syntax for allowing write access to a single directory and its contents? I was hoping to try at least a few very simple cases but I must be misunderstanding something. I'd appreciate a hint.

<details>
<summary>What I tried so far</summary>
I built 75d3848be4995a9480266dbef066a8034283408d on Ubuntu 22.04 x64.

This works from within `/home/tniessen/dev/node`, where `b` is a directory in the current working directory:

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write='*' -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```

```console
$ echo $(pwd) && test -d $(pwd)/b && echo "$(pwd)/b is a directory"
/home/tniessen/dev/node
/home/tniessen/dev/node/b is a directory
```

But none of these do, they all throw `ERR_ACCESS_DENIED`:

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write='/home/tniessen/dev/node/b/*' -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write='/home/tniessen/dev/node/b/' -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write='/home/tniessen/dev/node/b' -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write='/home/tniessen/dev/node/b/foo' -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write='/home/tniessen/dev/node/' -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write="$(pwd)" -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```

```console
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-write="$(pwd)/*" -e "fs.writeFileSync('b/foo', 'test')"
```
</details>

Author: I'll look into it

Author: It was a bug @tniessen. The tests didn't catch it because I forgot to include another path instead `*` in the cli tests. Fixed in b7a2f479ab.

    at node:internal/main/run_main_module:23:47 {
  code: 'ERR_ACCESS_DENIED',
  permission: 'FileSystemIn'
}
```

Allowing access to spawning a process and creating worker threads can be done
using the `--allow-spawn` and `--allow-worker` respectively.

#### Runtime API

When enabling the Permission Model through the [`--experimental-permission`][]
flag a new property `permission` is added to the `process` module.
This property contains two functions:

* `permission.deny(scope [,parameters])`

API Call to _deny_ permissions at runtime. e.g

```js
process.permission.deny('fs'); // Deny permissions to ALL fs operations

// Deny permissions to ALL FileSystemOut operations
process.permission.deny('fs.write');
// deny FileSystemOut permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');
// Deny permissions to ALL FileSystemIn operations
process.permission.deny('fs.read');
// deny FileSystemIn permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.read', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');
```

It returns a boolean as an operation result.

> * `permission.check(scope [,parameters])`
> 
> API Call to _check_ permissions at runtime. e.g:
> 
> ```js
> process.permission.check('fs.write'); // true
> process.permission.check('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // true
> 
> process.permission.deny('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');
> 
> process.permission.check('fs.write'); // true
> process.permission.check('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // false
> ```

Reviewer 6: ````suggestion
* `permission.check(scope [,parameters])`
  * `scope` {string}
  * `parameters` {string}

  API Call to _check_ permissions at runtime.

  ```js
  process.permission.check('fs.write'); // true
  process.permission.check('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // true

  process.permission.deny('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');

  process.permission.check('fs.write'); // true
  process.permission.check('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // false
  ```
````

```

The valid arguments for the `--allow-fs` flag option are:

* `write` - To manage `FileSystemOut` (Writing) operations.
* `read` - To manage `FileSystemIn` (Reading) operations.
* `fs` - To allow all the `FileSystem` operations.

Example:

* `--allow-fs=read:/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemIn` access to the `/tmp/`
  folder.
* `--allow-fs=read:/tmp/:/home/.gitignore` - It allows `FileSystemIn` access to
  the `/tmp/` folder **and** the `/home/.gitignore` path.

You can also mix both arguments:

* `--allow-fs=write,read:/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemIn` access to the
  `/tmp/` folder **and** allow **all** the `FileSystemOut` operations.
* **Note**: It accepts wildcard parameters as well.
  For instance: `--allow-fs=write:/home/test*` will allow everything that
  matches the wildcard. e.g: `/home/test/file1` or `/home/test2`

There are constraints you need to know before using this system:

* Native modules are not supported by this mechanism.
* Relative paths aren't supported yet through the CLI (`--allow-fs`).
  The runtime API supports relative paths.
* File Descriptors opened before a permission set is applied won't be
  validated. Consider the following snippet:

> ```js
> const fs = require('fs');
> 
> // Open a fd
> const fd = fs.openSync('./README.md', 'r');
> // Then, deny access to all fs.read operations
> process.permission.deny('fs.read');
> // This call will NOT fail and the file will be read
> const data = fs.readFileSync(fd);
> ```

Reviewer 6: ````suggestion
  ```js
  const fs = require('node:fs');

  // Open a fd
  const fd = fs.openSync('./README.md', 'r');
  // Then, deny access to all fs.read operations
  process.permission.deny('fs.read');
  // This call will NOT fail and the file will be read
  const data = fs.readFileSync(fd);
  ```
````

Author: Why whitespaces?

Additionally, import maps only work on `import` so it may be desirable to add a
`"import"` condition to all dependency mappings.

## Process-based permissions

### Permission Model

<!-- type=misc -->

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

<!-- name=permission-model -->

The Node.js Permission Model is a mechanism to restrict access to specific
resources during the program execution.
The API exists behind a flag [`--experimental-permission`][] which when enabled,
will restrict access to all available permissions.

Currently, the available permissions are:

* File System - manageable through [`--allow-fs`][] flag
* Child Process - manageable through [`--allow-child-process`][] flag
* Worker Threads - manageable through [`--allow-worker`][] flag

Therefore, when starting a Node.js process with `--experimental-permission`,
the capabilities to access the filesystem, spawn process and,
use `node:worker_threads` will be restricted.

```console
$ node --experimental-permission index.js
node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:171
  const result = internalModuleStat(filename);
                 ^

> Error: Access to this API has been restricted

Author: I concur. But, unless this is strictly needed, I prefer to perform those improvements in subsequent PRs

> Error: Access to this API has been restricted

Author: Update: This seems a blocker for other contributors as well. I'll fix it.

    at stat (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:171:18)
    at Module._findPath (node:internal/modules/cjs/loader:627:16)
    at resolveMainPath (node:internal/modules/run_main:19:25)
    at Function.executeUserEntryPoint [as runMain] (node:internal/modules/run_main:76:24)
    at node:internal/main/run_main_module:23:47 {
  code: 'ERR_ACCESS_DENIED',
  permission: 'FileSystemIn'
}
```

Allowing access to spawning a process and creating worker threads can be done
using the `--allow-spawn` and `--allow-worker` respectively.

#### Runtime API

When enabling the Permission Model through the [`--experimental-permission`][]
flag a new property `permission` is added to the `process` module.

> This property contains two functions:

Author: I think that's too risky and I don't see many usages from it.

> This property contains two functions:

Reviewer 8: Ah, yes indeed. The module that's getting required might also do `process.permissions.accept('spawn');`.

* `permission.deny(scope [,parameters])`
  * `scope` {string}
  * `parameters` {Array} array of strings

>   * Returns: {boolean} Operation result.

Reviewer 9: I'm not sure that we need to reiterate this here. Can we just link to the appropriate place in the `process` docs?

> API Call to _deny_ permissions at runtime. e.g

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
API call to deny permissions at runtime. e.g
```

```js
process.permission.deny('fs'); // Deny permissions to ALL fs operations

// Deny permissions to ALL FileSystemOut operations
process.permission.deny('fs.write');
// deny FileSystemOut permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.write', ['/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder']);
// Deny permissions to ALL FileSystemIn operations
process.permission.deny('fs.read');
// deny FileSystemIn permissions to the protected-folder
process.permission.deny('fs.read', ['/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder']);
```

* `permission.check(scope [,parameters])`
  * `scope` {string}
  * `parameters` {string}

> API Call to _check_ permissions at runtime.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
API call to check permissions at runtime.
```

```js

> process.permission.check('fs.write'); // true

Author: `.can` looks good to me

> process.permission.check('fs.write'); // true

Author: Actually, `.has` seems better. I'll change that.

process.permission.check('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // true

process.permission.deny('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder');

process.permission.check('fs.write'); // true
process.permission.check('fs.write', '/home/rafaelgss/protected-folder'); // false
```

#### File System Permissions

> To allow access to the filesystem, you need to use the flag `--allow-fs`

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
To allow access to the filesystem, use the flag `--allow-fs`:
```

```console
$ node --experimental-permission --allow-fs=read index.js
Hello world!
(node:19836) ExperimentalWarning: Permission is an experimental feature
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)
```

The valid arguments for the `--allow-fs` flag option are:

> * `write` - To manage `FileSystemOut` (Writing) operations.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
* `write` - To manage `FileSystemOut` (writing) operations.
```

> * `read` - To manage `FileSystemIn` (Reading) operations.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
* `read` - To manage `FileSystemIn` (reading) operations.
```

* `fs` - To allow all the `FileSystem` operations.

Example:

> * `--allow-fs=read:/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemIn` access to the `/tmp/`

Reviewer 9: There seems to be a lot of overlap with the docs added to cli.md. I think we should be careful about duplicating content because it can get out of sync. We can link to the appropriate docs when necessary instead.

  folder.
* `--allow-fs=read:/tmp/:/home/.gitignore` - It allows `FileSystemIn` access to
  the `/tmp/` folder **and** the `/home/.gitignore` path.

You can also mix both arguments:

* `--allow-fs=write,read:/tmp/` - It will allow `FileSystemIn` access to the
  `/tmp/` folder **and** allow **all** the `FileSystemOut` operations.
* **Note**: It accepts wildcard parameters as well.
  For instance: `--allow-fs=write:/home/test*` will allow everything that
  matches the wildcard. e.g: `/home/test/file1` or `/home/test2`

There are constraints you need to know before using this system:

> * Native modules are not supported by this mechanism.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
* Native modules are not restricted by the Permission System once loaded.
```

> * Relative paths aren't supported yet through the CLI (`--allow-fs`).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
* Relative paths are not supported through the CLI (`--allow-fs`).
```

  The runtime API supports relative paths.

> * File Descriptors opened before a permission set is applied won't be

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
* Permission changes are not retroactively applied to existing resources.
```
